{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Verdana;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15120\viewh18480\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280

\f0\b\fs20 \cf0 Intro
\b0 \
\
-present scenarios and philosophy behind them and open it up.\
-disclaimer\'97not an expert, never taken a philosophy course. I just think it's fun if morbid.\
-just a series of questions so get ready.\
-first a quick poll:\
  \'95 who here considers themselves to be a moral person?\
  \'95 who does not care about what is right, just whatever works best for them?\
  \'95 no such thing really as morality. One moral system is just as valid as any other. It's all relative and you can never say what is right and wrong.\
\

\b Trolley\

\b0 \
-who's heard of it? \'85 what if you happened to know that the fat guy was a real jerk?\
\
-Consequentialist (Jeremy Bentham): locates morality in the consequences of an act. Utilitarianism, a consequentialist theory, says the greatest good for the greatest number. Hedonistic Utilitarianism says the goal is to maximize happiness and minimize suffering. Each to count for one and none to count for more than one.\
\
-Categorialism (Immanuel Kant): locates morality in certain duties and rights; having to do with the intrinsic quality of the act itself, consequences be what they may. Justice is a matter of respecting human dignity and a person's inalienable rights. Treating people as ends in themselves, never as means. Kant was such a categorialist that he said it would be wrong to lie to the murderer at the door.\
\
-Bentham died in 1832 at 85. But he provided in his will that his body be preserved, embalmed and displayed at the University of London. Consistent with his philosophy. Embalming was a failure.\
\

\b Queen vs Dudley and Stephens\

\b0 \
-19th cen. British law case. 19 May 1884, the yacht Minonette set sail for Sydney from Southampton with a crew of four: Tom Dudley, the captain; Edwin Stephens, the first mate; Edmund Brooks, sailor; and Richard Parker, the cabin boy. Parker was 17 years old, an inexperienced sailor with no family. The ship goes down in the south Atlantic, 1300 miles from the cape. The 4 crew members escape to a life boat with 2 cans of preserved turnips and no fresh water.\
\
-19th day. Parker is sick from drinking seawater. Dudley suggests a lottery. Brooks refuses.\
-next day Dudley told Brooks to avert his gaze and motioned to Stephens that it was time to kill Parker. Dudley offered a prayer, told the boy his time had come and killed him, stabbing him in the jugular vein with a pen knife. Then they all ate him.\
-from Dudley's diary, "on the 24th day, as we were having our breakfast, a ship appeared at last."\
-the 3 survivors were picked up by a German ship, taken back to England where they were arrested and tried.\
-(poll) keep in mind, is necessity a defense for murder? or fundamental rights?\
-lottery have made a difference? or Parker's consent?\
\

\b Argument against Consequentialism\

\b0 \
-common criticism of consequentialism: that it's too quick to produce an answer to these questions. That it's too simple a calculus that could say if a majority is big enough and if their will is strong enough, then you could justify some pretty heinous things.\
\
-Like torture. Hypothetically, let's say New York City is about to be obliterated by a nuclear bomb and you are sure that the only way to stop it is to torture a known terrorist\'97or even his innocent daughter in front of him. Should you do it? (poll\'97ignore politics) Now Henry Sidgwick would say yes but it might be a good idea not tell anyone that you did it. That is, saying torture is sometimes justified as a rule is a bad idea because the rule, "do not torture" has good consequences. Sidgwick called this esoteric morality: it may be right to do something only if the fact that you did it can be kept secret. He's also saying that some people may be in a privileged position or have privilege anywhere outside of academic circles. Like it's too dangerous an idea for the people to receive. But, ya know, I don't care.\
\

\b Questions and Reasons\

\b0 \
-What's the difference between Dudley and the second trolley scenario?\
}